So what do we learn basically
is that fundamentally,
you have this memory array, right?
And you have a CPU and the CPU reads and
writes into the memory and
there is basically an address
that you tell the memory,
which address do you want to read and
write out, right?
And CPU basically processes and
internally has a bunch of registers.
It has the arithmetic logic unit,
which basically means addition,
multiplication, and so on.
And you have the program counter,
stack pointer, etc.,
to have the special instructions.
So the physical machines really
understands only numbers, arithmetic,
flat memory, right?
It understands index access, so
that's the idea of A0 plus some AE0,
A extend AE.
It really understand subroutines and
I hopefully made point clear that
subroutines are really dumbed down
version of a function call, right?
There's many things missing in
a subroutine that would make it into
a function call mainly,
there are no calling conventions.
Calling conventions is on to
the compiler to produce, right?
In other words, how to parameters
get into the subroutine, and how
does the values get out of the subroutine,
and the idea of local variables.
We haven't really talked about it,
but they usually go on a stack.
So Fortran doesn't have
a concept of local variables.
So in Fortran,
when you call a function recursively,
you still have access to the same
variables and yeah recursion is fun.
So that's your physical machine.
And so out of this physical machine,
somehow you have to make
an actual machine, right?
And we have to make a JavaScript
virtual machine, right?
Something that looks
like JavaScript to you.
And so the first bizarre thing I'm gonna
show you is that how in the world is
it possible that a plus b would be
significantly faster than b plus a?
That makes no sense, right?
Why should this be?
So let's hop in back into our code,
so we're gonna just grab the count
from the command line and I'm gonna
have a couple functions there a b c and
d and if you look across these
functions are identical.
The only difference is the value
that they returned, right?
Sometimes there's 1, 2, 3 or
4 and we're gonna benchmark them.
And so
we're gonna have a benchmark function.
And the way the benchmark
will work is we'll say,
console log,
shows which one is gonna be running.
Grab the performance,
run the loop in some number of times,
and then compute the finish time,
and then print out how long
did it take to run the single iteration
of this particular function, right?
So let's do that.
Of course, I forgot the command.
What am I running here?
I think it's just there ,okay,
so an nr deopt.
Okay, so we'll run it and we see that, for
the most part, they're about the same.
I don't know what happened to D.
D is way slower.
Probably the garbage
collection has kicked in.
But the reason they're about the same is
because we're only running 10 iterations.
So let's increase the number
of iterations that we run.
And we get the first one is a little
slower, the next one has become faster.
What's happening?
Well, there is certainly startup costs
that exist inside of the VMs, and
also, it takes a while before
they compile things, etc.
So when the VM first starts running,
it runs an interpretive mode, and
then later it switches into compile mode.
And so, the why not compile
everything from the beginning?
Well, it takes time to compile things,
right?
And so you're doing a trade off being,
well, if I'm only running this code once,
it's probably faster for me to just
run it and other on the other hand,
if it's not a tight loop, it's probably
better for me to compile it and
run it in a faster per iteration.
And here you can see that originally
these loops start pretty slow.
They take four microseconds to run, but
as the VM warms up the performance
improves, it's the same exact function,
you can see the functions is getting
better and faster and faster.
So then we go to maybe a hundred and
now we're really cooking and you can see
that the VM is really has gotten its
stride and it's running pretty good.
And now let's go to even faster.
And yeah,
now they're about the same, right?
Let's go even more iterations.
And the first two, looks like the last
two are really compiled at this point,
you can see that it's down to eight.
Let's go to even more iterations.
Now all of them seem to be running in the
compiled mode and they run about the same
but go, let's go even more iterations and
now we're things start to happen.
What in the world, why is A so
much faster than everybody else?
You notice that A is running about less
than 2 microseconds per iteration,
whereas everybody else is about 4.6 or
so iterations, and
I can keep going in terms of
the number of iterations.
It's not gonna change.
This number is gonna be pretty stable.
At this point,
we are running as fast as we can, and
yet the first one is way
faster than everybody else.
Why?
What's going on in here?
If you look at what
we're actually running,
is we're running the same exact code.
Why is that?
And just to kind of prove a point,
I can switch,
I can run B first, and then A.
And then what we're gonna see is that it's
still the first one that ran was faster
than the other ones.
Why?
What's going on?
Anybody wants to take a guess?
>> Is the value stored in a better place
in the CPU first one that goes in?
>> Not quite.
So look at this particular function here.
>> What of caching?
>> Caching would be a good guess, but it's
a caching in a way that you don't expect.
So let me explain what's happening here.
We run this function and this function
is iterating over and over the fn.
And remember function is a subroutine with
this whole complicated overhead of like,
I when I call a function, I have to push
values onto the stack, I have to make
sure that I save all the registers
then I do work and then I return back.
And in this case,
the actual work that we're doing,
we're just adding two numbers together or
comparing and returning a number and
that's so insignificant compared to
the cost of actually making the call is
that the call is dominating
the cost of the function,
the amount of work that we're actually
doing inside of the function.
And so, what the VM does after
a while it says you know what,
I see that you keep calling
this function here.
I'm gonna inline it.
And so it takes the function and
inlines it into this location, and
now this loop can run a lot faster because
what happens is when you inline, so
lemme let's back up how compilation works.
Let's back up.
One of the things that the compiler
has to do is look at the code and
look at the local variables, and then
decide where do these local variables go?
Do they go into registers,
or do they go into memory?
You can imagine that if you have a lot
of local variables, you will exhaust all
possible registers, and eventually
you have to go into memory, right?
So, the compiler has to make some choices.
Where do I store this stuff?
Maybe it's temporary and
I can store it inside of a register.
Maybe it's long enough that I have
to put it on memory, et cetera.
It has to make choices.
And so it looks at the program, and
whenever it comes across a function call,
it doesn't look into the function
cuz that's something else, right?
And so it only does optimization,
figuring out what goes where based on what
it sees inside of its current function.
So if you can inline the function then
the layout and assignment of registers can
be better laid out because now you can
basically save yourself the making
the call but not just saving yourself
the call the calling convention.
Because it's inline disappears, and
instead the compiler looks at the whole
function that's in lined and says,
if I just like lay out the registers
differently, I can save myself
the trouble of going to the memory.
Right?
And so the function originally
was compiled once without
the function in lined.
And then the CPU ran for a while and
the virtual machine notice you keep
running this thing over and over again.
I think it'd be useful to inline it.
So let's try to inline it see if I can get
better performance out of the system and
sure enough, I can get so
much better performance, right?
So the reason why B runs or
the the first one runs fast
it's because the first one got inlined,
but now notice what happens next.
Now we finish all the iteration,
we go up and
now we run B with a different
value of the benchmark.
And now we run this, and now the compiler
realizes, wow, I made a mistake.
I inlined something that I thought was
constant, but it turns out it isn't.
I have now observed that this function fn
is not the same function all the time.
Sometimes it's fna, and
sometimes it's fnb, and
therefore I've made a mistake, right?
The compiler was trying to
do the best possible thing,
given the knowledge it had, and up to that
point, it has always only seen function A.
And therefore it was
a reasonable assumption to say,
this is always gonna be a function A.
But now when he saw an example of a Black
Swan, you know the Black Swan example?
Everybody thinks there's only white swans
because that's all you've ever seen.
But you only need one black swan
to kind of convince you like, no,
there are different colors.
You just don't have one, okay?
So now it has seen a different function
and now the compiler is like, crap,
I missed up I can't inline this anymore.
Because I've seen that sometimes it's
function A and sometimes it's function B,
and because of that,
the inline that I have done was incorrect.
And that's called a deopt, right?
The compiler was trying
to optimize something and
because it had insufficient information,
it optimized something in
an incorrect way, and so now it has
to back off from this optimization.
And so deopt is when the compiler
gets to see a black swan go by and
says, oops, the assumptions I have
made here, no longer hold true.
And therefore the code that I
have generated is incorrect.
What actually happens is
when the code is generated,
the compiler leaves behind checks.
So when it inlines the function A, there's
a hidden check that basically says,
before you pretend everything is normal,
double check that function A is
really the same function, right?
And of course,
that check is always true until it isn't.
And when it isn't,
the compiler is like, oops, I messed up.
And this is what is called a deopt, right?
And so in a deopt, it undoes the work and
says, okay, I cannot inline this.
It marks this as non-inlinable and
then continues running the code
in a non-inlined way because
it now knows that sometimes it's
function A, sometimes it's function B.
Why does this matter?
It matters because it is so
easy to convince yourself of the wrong
thing on microbenchmarks,
specifically because of this.
When you make a microbenchmark, you're
saying, look how fast my code is, but
what you're not doing is you're not
exercising all of the different paths.
And as a result,
the VM looks at the code and
says, all of these functions are constant,
I can inline them.
And it does so, and it gives you
the illusion that the code you have just
written performs a lot better than it
will actually perform in reality, right?
Whenever you do micro benchmarks,
the reason why micro benchmarks are looked
at with great skepticism, is because
stuff like this, it's so easy to kind
of shoot yourself in the foot and
start measuring the wrong thing, right?
And so in this particular case,
the question you should be
asking yourself is how could
I have seen this coming?
And the way you would know to answer the
question is that a lot of it is kind of
experience of like when
you're doing it for
a while you kind of know what to look for.
The thing to look for here is to
recognize the fact you know what,
this is gonna be a problem because when I
wrote the code I knew because I'm human
I know more than a compiler does, right?
I knew that this function is
going to change shape over time.
We talk about shape as in the reference,
the kind of function we get here.
It's changing shape here, right?
So, the fancy term for it,
it's polymorphic, right?
Poly means many more have means to change,
right?
So it has many changes
that are happening there.
So the fancy word for
this is that it's polymorphic.
So the way the modern V8 or
modern virtual machines work is they,
try to look for things that appear
constant, and if they notice basically,
it executes this piece of code several
thousand times, and if in several thousand
times it has never seen it to change, then
it just assumes that it must never change.
And then that assumption is used
to better compile the output code.
Until that assumption is no longer true,
and then things break.
And this is when we get a deopt, right?
So when when people talk about deopts
what it means is that the VM ran,
it collected information
it observed the world and
up to that point, it looked like
these set of invariants were true.
Based on those invariants, it generated
code that later proved to be wrong.
And so a deopt is whenever
the invariant that you thought was
true turns out was not, okay?
So if you have been coding for a while,
and as a human, whenever you see this
thing, you should ask yourself, first of
all, many times it just doesn't matter,
so don't assume that,
apply this everywhere, right?
Decide whether it matters or not.
When you have something that you think
matters in terms of performance,
ask yourself,
is this function actually expensive?
Is it monomorphic, right?
Is this always gonna be
the same function or not?
And if the answer is none,
it's a different function,
then second question to ask is, well, is
the cost of calling the function compared
to the amount of work the function
is doing significant, right?
Because if this function is
something super expensive,
it doesn't matter whether in lines or
does it makes no difference.
And if it doesn't, then you might consider
for example, to do the inlining yourself.
So let me give you an example, a typical
thing we might do is we might have
a queue of a list of functions to run.
And let's say you have two
different functions you run,
either let's say add numbers or
multiply numbers, right?
Those are pretty simple operations.
And so
you put them inside of an array, and
you tell the program to for over
the loop over the array, and
then read the function and invoke it.
What the VM will see is that those
are functions that are always different,
I can't inline them.
But what if you can inline it yourself?
What if you put the two functions, you
inline the functions directly in there,
and just put an if statement in front
of it, and then inside of the array,
instead of putting the functions, you just
put a number, or boolean, true or false,
meaning true means add the numbers, false
means to multiply the numbers, right?
That alone will make the code run faster,
because you fundamentally did the inlining
for it, and now you've made the invariant
that the data flowing through
the system is monomorphic, right?
You are always gonna get a boolean and
the function you're calling
is always the same.
And in some cases,
that might make a difference, right?
We're talking here about two and a half
times faster in this particular case.
So, again, it depends on
a situation that you might have.
Yes?
>> Is function declaration
faster than function expression
because function expression
works with only references?
>> There's no difference.
To my knowledge, there is no difference,
because even a function declaration
can close over other things.
So the two have differences in
terms of how you declare them and
how they're allocated, but at run time
my understanding is they're absolutely
the same as far as the VM is concerned.